We’ve all seen them - videos of 
well-armed ragamuffins and ne'er-do-wells  

celebrating their various triumphs with 
some good old-fashioned upwards gunfire.

After all, nothing says “I ran a 10k” or 
“We just overthrew the government” quite  

like pointing your gun to the sky and let ‘ner 
rip. It’s essentially the gun-lover's fist-pump.

But is it possible that this seemingly 
innocent expression of gun-based joy  

could actually be… dare I say it... 
dangerous? Perish the thought!

I’m Stu, this is Debunked, and we’re 
here to sort the truths from the myths,  

and the facts from the misconceptions.

This video is brought to you by Atlas VPN.

So there you are, chuffed to bits at the 
victory of your preferred political candidate,  

and overcome with an irrepressible urge 
to celebrate in the only way you know how.  

You grab whatever loaded firearm you have handy, 
rush outside, and start gleefully firing off round  

after round into the air just as nature intended, 
when suddenly, a chilling thought falls upon you;  

these bullets have to come 
back down eventually, right?

Unsurprisingly, the answer to 
this question is an emphatic

“yes, you idiot!”

When a gun is fired, a number of different 
factors determine the bullet’s path through  

the air on the way to its target. One of the first 
things to consider is ‘muzzle velocity’, which is,  

very simply, the speed at which a bullet is moving 
the moment it leaves the gun barrel, or ‘muzzle’.

This can vary considerably depending on 
the kind of gun and round being used;  

the ever popular AK-47 for instance is capable of 
firing bullets at around 715 metres per second,  

or about 2,350 feet per second,

while in modern rifles, some of the fastest 
high performance cartridges can reach muzzle  

velocities of well over 1,200 metres per 
second, or about 4,000 feet per second.

Due to the effects of air resistance, bullets 
slow down pretty quickly after they’ve been fired,  

and follow a route determined 
by a variety of factors,  

including things like ATMOSPHERIC 
pressure, humidity, and air temperature.

However, the thing that pulls a fired 
bullet downwards is plain old gravity,  

which, assuming those other aforementioned 
variables aren’t having an overwhelming effect,

ensures that bullets travel back to 
earth in a roughly parabolic path.

Now, celebratory gunfire differs substantially 
from regular gunfire in that it is generally not  

directed at people you want to shoot, but upwards 
and away from those you’re celebrating with,  

who you don’t want to hit 
(well, not usually anyway).

That way, the bullets just 
disappear up into space, right?

At least, that’s what people used to think. Early, 
pre-seventeenth century studies . suggested that  

bullets shot upwards do somehow achieve 
escape velocity and peace out into space,

we now know that all bullets shot from the 
surface of Earth never even leave the troposphere,  

the lowest layer of our planet’s atmosphere, 
and unless you’re watching this from the  

International Space Station, 
the one you’re in right now.

In reality, when a bullet 
is fired directly upwards,  

the upward force accelerating the bullet drops 
off entirely the moment it leaves the chamber.  

At this point the bullet is at its maximum 
velocity and has its maximum kinetic energy.

From this point, downward forces from gravity and 
air resistance begin to slow the bullet's ascent.

The bullet reaches its highest point when 
its kinetic energy has been transferred  

to heat and gravitational potential 
energy. Here Its velocity is zero.

As the bullet accelerates downward, its 
velocity increases; as does the air resistance,

and when a bullet falls naturally it 
will often spin and tumble in the air,  

further increasing the air resistance and 
slowing its acceleration significantly.

When gravity and air resistance balance out, 
the bullet will hit its terminal velocity,  

meaning it will no longer go any faster.

The question is, are bullets falling 
at this speed still dangerous? Well,  

the terminal velocity of a falling bullet will 
obviously vary depending on the type of bullet,  

but, generally-speaking - yes, very much so.

But before we get into that, we’d 
like to introduce you to Atlas VPN. 

We've all heard the term, but what is a VPN? 
Well a Virtual Private Network makes all of your  

internet traffic travel through an encrypted 
tunnel, protecting you from spying and hides  

your IP address and online activities. You don’t 
want online trackers monitoring your every move,  

so Atlas VPN scrambles all the information related 
to your browsing habits. That's yours to keep.

But, whilst a VPN will keep you safe online,  

the real bonus is that it allows you 
to access geo-restricted content.

That means accessing content that is 
usually only available in other countries.

Open AtlasVPN, select one of their 
servers in your desired country  

and ta dah you’re watching a whole host of new 
content from your preferred streaming service!

For me, when I travel abroad, I use a UK 
server from wherever I am in the world  

to access the incredible library of content 
available on BBC iPlayer. It has let me continue  

to binge every season of Line Of Duty, and keep 
ahead of any spoilers of their recent drama  

Vigil based on a Nuclear Submarine. By 
clicking the link in my description box  

you will get AtlasVPN for just 
$1.39 month + 4 months for FREE'

Unblocking sites, online services, 
and new entertainment channels.

Right, let’s travel back to the 1920s,  

the U.S. military conducted a series 
of tests on falling bullets...

...and found that a .30 caliber 
round can reach terminal velocities  

of 90 metres per second, or 
just over 200 miles per hour.

According to forensic scientist Dr. 
B. N. Mattoo, a .30 caliber round

can break through skin while travelling at 
speeds as low as 37 metres per second, or 85  

miles per hour. As you can see, falling bullets 
have more than enough energy to cause you harm,  

possibly worse.

And that’s just regarding falling bullets; 
In reality, people celebrating things with  

gunfire aren’t generally bothered about making 
sure that their weapon is perfectly vertical.

If a gun is fired at a sufficiently shallow angle,  

instead of stalling and falling, the bullet will 
often retain its angular ballistic trajectory  

and continue on it’s parabolic path, making it 
far less likely to begin tumbling in the air.

As a result, such bullets will 
lose considerably less speed  

compared to a bullet in freefall, and will be 
travelling much faster when they hit the ground…  

or whatever gets
in its way first.

But if all that fancy maths and 
science talk isn’t sufficient  

to convince you that the threat from 
falling ammunition is very real indeed,  

there are unfortunately numerous real-life 
examples of this actually happening.

As it happens, firing off a few rounds with 
the lads is not a particularly uncommon  

phenomenon and is a culturally acceptable way to 
celebrate in a number of places around the world,  

In 2012, a study conducted in the United States 
found that a not insignificant 4.6% of all deaths  

and injuries from stray bullets “occur as 
a direct result of celebratory gunfire”.

The list of incidents is sadly not a short one, 
and features examples from all over the world.

In 2003, during a traditional 
Serbian wedding celebration, guests  

shot down a small plane while firing into 
the skies, injuring the two men onboard.

In 2007, at least four people were killed and 
many more injured as a result of stray bullets  

from celebratory gunfire, after the Iraqi national 
football team won the AFC Asian Cup that year.

In 2021, militant leaders claimed to 
take control of part of Afghanistan.  

Their resulting celebratory gunfire injured 41 
people and led to the deaths of at least 17.

Back in 1999, a teenager called Shannon 
Smith was killed after being struck in  

the head by a stray bullet while 
outside in her backyard in Arizona.

This prompted the state to enact ‘Shannon’s Law’,  

which made it illegal to discharge a firearm 
into the air in Arizona's cities and towns.

Indeed, in some respects, falling 
bullets may even be considered more  

dangerous than regular gunfire. Between 
1985 and 1992, a group of physicians at  

the Martin Luther King/Drew medical centre in 
Los Angeles studied victims of gunshot wounds,  

identifying 118 who had been 
struck by falling bullets.

Compared to those hurt in your average, boring,  

run-of-the-mill shootings, who died 
at rates of between 2 and 6 percent,  

the death rate of those unlucky enough to 
be hit by fall bullets was around a third.

This is because, despite moving at slower speeds, 
bullets falling to the ground vertically are far  

more likely to hit you in the top of the head 
compared to other less lethal points of the body. 

As you can see...

...celebratory gunfire is 
not particularly uncommon,  

and the risk that it poses is very real indeed. 

So the next time your football team wins, or 
you’re just jazzed about it being New Years, it  

might be a good idea not to randomly pump the sky 
full of lead. Stick to confetti cannons instead.

Remember to click on our exclusive link 
for Atlas VPN in the video description,  

and you’ll access a 3-year subscription for 
just $1.39 a month plus 4 months for FREE,  

and a 30-day money-back guarantee!

Thanks for watching, thank you to our 
Patreons and we’ll see you next time.

